Title: Going Back to Work
Subtitle: Written October 9, 2012
Description: A personal story of returning to work after becoming a father.
Modified: 2024-10-27

## Birth

![A proud father and his son](../images/12-10-09/baby.jpg){ .article-width }
About a month ago I had the great fortune of having an amazing new person
stumble into my life, ready to challenge by his very existence the way I think
about myself and my role in the world. That person is my first child, a
beautiful baby boy. Even at his young age he is already full of contradictions:
At times, he studies the world with the attentiveness and calm of a philosopher,
taking it all in without pausing to divulge what pearls of wisdom he has
gleaned. By contrast, he is barely cognizant of his own internal state and it's
taken weeks of careful observation to discern which cries are hunger, gas or
fatigue. We have had to teach him how to eat and how to sleep, which has really
driven home the point that literally everything he will know or do as an adult
decades from now he will have to somehow be taught.

Two weeks after he was born I returned to the office to resume work. There was a
pang of regret that I expect many a father feels at being away from his only
child all day, but there was also something else I didn't expect: a new urgency,
a ticking clock that wasn't there before. I'll elaborate in a minute, but first
some back story.

## Childhood

Last year I was a computer game developer. There is a fair amount of truth to
what most people assume about game developers: we spend a respectable portion of
our time play testing games, the atmosphere is one of creativity, fun, and
self-expression (relative to most software development teams), and in the end we
have our share of fans because we are essentially in the same industry as
Hollywood and record labels. There is also however a fair amount of dysfunction:
unrealistic deadlines, dysfunctional corporate partnerships and licensing
agreements, and a disturbingly high rate of failed studios and canceled
projects. I could write a whole blog post on this subject. It's a shame, because
I know from experience that games can elicit strong emotions, games can change
attitudes, and most importantly, games can teach. This last point is important
because it got me thinking seriously about how I could use my technical skills
to make an impact in the field of education.

The observation that depresses me most about our education system in America is
how little things have changed since I was a child. Students I speak to going to
elementary, middle and high school now have almost the same experience in class
that I did - they are taught the same subjects in the same ways. So, what is the
problem? Just look at the rest of their lives: they carry in their pockets
computers orders of magnitude more powerful than those of two decades ago,
social networking connects them in realtime with their friends and family, and
millions of videos (at least half of which are not cat-related) are free to
watch anytime. The possibilities for learning have never been greater: Wikipedia
dwarfs any encyclopedia or public library, you can visit many museums and art
galleries virtually, thousands of books can be downloaded wirelessly onto a
single portable reader, and many research journals are now publicly available
online. Such massive technological changes in the world have been incredibly
disruptive in many industries - finance, commerce, entertainment, journalism,
health care, art, the list goes on and on. But no matter how much we all agree
that these same seismic changes will eventually happen in education, as a
society we have so far been too timid to experiment with new ways to teach our
children.

## Maturity

Enter Khan Academy. Sal's project began very humbly, tutoring his niece in Math
over the Internet. I have also tutored middle and high school students in Math,
and there is a key insight I took away from the experience: the students who
needed tutoring were not dumb, or slow, or stupid. Surprisingly, the thing they
all had in common was a serious gap in their understanding of some basic
concept. Over time they had developed an attitude of defensiveness and
unwillingness to address the issue, especially if the key concept was several
grade levels beneath them. As a tutor I found myself in the awkward position of
trying to get someone through Algebra who didn't really understand the
relationship between fractions, percentages, and decimals and who felt that
understanding to be permanently out of her reach. What I saw Khan Academy doing
was addressing both issues: By using videos, a student who needs basic concepts
explained over and over can get that in the privacy of their room without
feeling judged or rushed. And by encouraging self-paced learning, a student will
not be tutored in Algebra until she has demonstrated a thorough understanding of
the prerequisite concepts. Most importantly, I saw no other company that was
experimenting with new teaching methods and reaching actual students. All these
reasons convinced me that by joining this team I would have a positive social
impact, and that is what I did.

By its very mandate, Khan Academy is disruptive. We put resources and tools out
there for free, for anyone to use, and let schools who dare to experiment with
new ideas and teaching methods come to us. The fact that schools and districts
have actually done so is very encouraging to me, and it gives me hope that by
the time my son reaches school age, schools all across the country will be
experiencing a much-needed renaissance of creativity, experimentation, and
progress. As a parent I want to encourage him to find his own interests, his own
voice, and a love for learning for its own sake. Rather than being a conduit for
dry instruction, schools can teach kids to be informed citizens and morally
conscious people. This is far more important and difficult than conveying a
specific bit of knowledge or administering a standardized test. Sure, it is
counterintuitive to speak of online education as a key tool for unlocking the
human element of education, but that is what I see in the pilot schools and in
our community of students and teachers. There is a hunger for change, and as
more startups appear to feed that hunger the change will accelerate.

## Parenthood

The clock has been ticking for a long time, even though it didn't hit home for
me until my son was born. It lights a fire beneath me to work harder at this job
that I love, not just because of the wonderful people I get to work with but
because we're working toward a common mission: to make education accessible and
effective for everybody. This is not an abstract goal - in the next decade tens
of millions of children will walk into their first classroom. How many will
eventually go to college? How many will be able to compete in a global economy?
How many will develop a lifelong love of learning?

As much as I would love to spend all my time staying home with my son, I take
comfort in the knowledge that what we strive for every day is a brighter future
for him and millions like him all over the world. I couldn't imagine a more
rewarding way to spend my days.

P.S. Do you write code? Do you get goosebumps pondering the potential of
technology to transform education and get a whole generation excited about
learning? Do you enjoy freshly baked bread? We have a software developer
position open! Email me at tom at khanacademy.org to find out more.